paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: 'DUGseis: A Python package for real-time and post-processing of picoseismicity'

tags:
  - Python
  - ObsPy
  - induced seismicity
  - picoseismicity
  - fluid injection
  - hydraulic stimulation

authors:
  - name: Martina Rosskopf 
    orcid: 0009-0004-7156-4927
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Virginie Durand
    orcid: 0000-0002-9380-5363
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Linus Villiger
    orcid: 0000-0002-0442-7963
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Joseph Doetsch
    orcid: 0000-0002-2927-9557
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Anne Obermann
    orcid: 0000-0001-6933-6301
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Lion Krischer
    orcid: 0000-0001-5867-6634
    affiliation: 5
affiliations:
  - name: Institute of Geophysics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
    index: 1
  - name: Swiss Seismological Service, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
    index: 2
  - name: GeoAzur, Université Côte d’Azur, France
    index: 3
  - name: Lufthansa Industry Solutions, Raunheim, Germany
    index: 4
  - name: Mondaic AG, Zurich, Switzerland
    index: 5

date: 22 December 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---


# Summary
Detecting earthquakes and compiling them to earthquake catalogs are fundamental tasks in seismology. 
Acoustic emission sensors allow the detection of tiniest so called picoseismic events, representing fractures on the mm, 
cm or dm scale (-6<magnitude<0). Such picoseismic events have corner frequencies of 1 kHz-1 MHz and cannot be 
handled by standard seismic processing softwares that deal with signals <500 Hz. Other commercial software 
for monitoring picoseismicity (e.g. from GMuG - Gesellschaft für Materialprüfung und Geophysik) for structural health
monitoring applications, e.g., in mines, exists but are 
only trigger-based. For large-scale experiments in underground laboratories (e.g., hydraulic stimulation, 
earthquake nucleation, nuclear waste disposal), continuous recordings of the seismicity data streams in the MHz 
range are required to study the rock response in great detail. The DUGseis software package fills this gap. 
It has been developed to manage, process and visualize continuous, high-frequency seismic data. The package can be 
used to create real-time and post-processing earthquake catalogs and to directly visualize their 
event waveforms and locations in a graphical interface. As the software is Python-based, users can easily 
add their own processing routines.

# Statement of need
The open-source, Python-based DUGseis package is designed to align with the functionalities of 
SeisComP [@seiscomp], a standard software used in microseismic-large scale earthquake processing (<500Hz, M>-0.5). 
DUGseis is tailored for picoseismic events (-6<M<0) with much higher frequency ranges (kHz-MHz), as recorded by 
acoustic emission sensors (AE sensors). High-frequency seismic data processing is common in mining environments to 
monitor tunnel stability and has become very popular in underground laboratories. To date, these projects used
trigger-based recordings, which means that the incoming waveform data is only saved to disk when a pre-set 
trigger threshold is reached by a recorded event. A disadvantage of the triggered recording strategy is the 
so-called dead time. Once an event has been triggered, no further event can be triggered until the processing of 
the first triggered event has been completed. The dead time can be a multiple of the recording time, meaning that 
important events can be missed if another event has just occurred before. Eliminating this dead time is important 
when high event rates are expected. With DUGseis it is possible to record and store [@DugSeisAcqui] continuous 
waveform data in the MHz range and process the data directly, removing these dead times. As DUGseis is Python-based,
researchers have the flexibility to complement the processing with their own Python-based 
codes, adapted to the need of their project. 

# Functionality and Features
The DUGseis software is a Python-based package that focuses on processing continuous high-frequency data, 
extracting waveforms of picoseismic events and creating an earthquake catalog. To make its use and output more 
accessible to seismologists, some features use modules and functions from the ObsPy package [@Beyreuther2010], 
a popular package in seismology.\
The DUGseis software requires sensor metadata with sensor locations as StationXML files and continuous waveform 
data in the ASDF format [@Greenfield2015; @asdf] to run. Here, the continuous waveform data was acquired using  
DUGseis acquisition [@DugSeisAcqui], another software package developed specifically for the Bedretto Underground 
Laboratory to record and store waveform data from AE sensors in the ASDF format using specific Spectrum digitizer 
cards. For general use of the DUGseis package presented here, the waveform data does not need to be acquired 
from the DUGseis acquisition, but the ASDF format can be transferred from other data formats. \
DUGseis retrieves all important information regarding data directories and processing settings from a 
configuration file. The configuration file can be used to open a graphical interface or passed to 
the processing script. After processing the continuous waveform data, DUGseis outputs an event catalog as 
a database, which can also be saved as QuakeML or CSV files. \autoref{fig:DUGseisScatch} shows 
the input and output of the DUGseis processing.

![In- and output of DUGseis processing. \label{fig:DUGseisScatch}](DUGseis_InputOutputScatch.png)

***Data processing***\
The processing itself is done within Python scripts that call various DUGseis functions, increasing flexibility 
of use.\
DUGseis was mainly developed to process continuous waveform data recorded by AE sensors. @Villiger2020 used 
an initial version of the DUGseis software at the Grimsel Laboratory. The software was further developed for 
the hydraulic stimulation experiments performed at the Bedretto Underground Laboratory [@Obermann2024]. For 
this purpose, it was necessary to process data in real-time during the stimulations in order to assess the hazard 
potential of the ongoing stimulation and to gain a direct understanding of the fluid propagation in the rock 
volume. In addition, more detailed post-processing was required after stimulation to learn 
more about the rock volume response. Both, real-time analysis and post-processing can be carried out using the 
DUGseis package. During the live processing, directories are monitored in real time for new incoming data. 
For the post-processing, all directories containing stored continuous waveform data are passed to the processing 
script. This continuous data is then re-processed during replay, which is a major advantage over 
trigger-based software, where only the waveforms of the already triggered events could be revisited. \
The DUGseis package includes many typical seismological processing steps to produce earthquake catalogs. The 
steps may include a detection stage to select event candidates on a number of predefined sensors. This step 
can be useful to speed up the processing, especially in real-time. Other processing steps are the picking 
of all traces with different pickers (e.g. STA/LTA), the localization of events with a basic location algorithm and 
the estimation of magnitudes, currently based on acoustic emission sensors. Several methods are implemented for 
some of the processing steps, whcih can be selected by the user. Furthermore, all processing steps can be adapted 
to the needs of the researcher. For more detailed information on which steps were used in the Bedretto Underground 
laboratory, see @Obermann2024.\
After processing, the output of the events, including arrivals and picks, are stored in a 
database and can also be saved as QuakeML or CSV files.

***Graphical Interface***\
Another feature of DUGSeis is its ability to visualize the recorded waveform data and to allow manual repicking and 
relocating, both in real-time and in post-processing. The graphical interface (GUI) displays not only waveforms, but also 
the output of the processing stage, such as the origin and pick times of an event. Additionally, 
the event and sensor locations are shown in a 3D visualization. \autoref{fig:GUI_example} shows the 
layout of the graphical user interface.\
The GUI provides the ability to inspect each event and view the channels that recorded 
the event. In addition, manual repicking and relocating can be done here. 

![Graphical interface of GUI with waveforms and picks of an event and the 3D plot of the events in the database. \label{fig:GUI_example}](DUGseisGUI_V3.JPG)

# Usage
Since 2021 dozens of hydraulic stimulation experiments have been performed at the Bedretto Underground 
Laboratory in Switzerland [@Ma2022; @Plenkers2023; @Obermann2024]. In this context, the DUGseis package 
was used to detect picoseismicity by processing the incoming high-frequency waveform data in real-time and 
in post-processing mode [@Obermann2024]. A small seismic dataset from one of the hydraulic stimulations can be 
found in [@DUGseisExample].

# Acknowledgements
The submitting author, Martina Rosskopf, is funded by SNF Project “Characterizing and understanding Enhanced 
Geothermal Systems (EGS) - novel tools and applications in a deep underground laboratory” (200021_192151). The 
BedrettoLab is financed by ETH Zürich and the Werner Siemens Foundation. This paper is BULGG publication BPN_023.

# References

Commit message:

updated paper - added software citation

paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: 'DUGseis: A Python package for real-time and post-processing of picoseismicity'

tags:
  - Python
  - ObsPy
  - induced seismicity
  - picoseismicity
  - fluid injection
  - hydraulic stimulation

authors:
  - name: Martina Rosskopf 
    orcid: 0009-0004-7156-4927
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Virginie Durand
    orcid: 0000-0002-9380-5363
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Linus Villiger
    orcid: 0000-0002-0442-7963
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Joseph Doetsch
    orcid: 0000-0002-2927-9557
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Anne Obermann
    orcid: 0000-0001-6933-6301
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Lion Krischer
    orcid: 0000-0001-5867-6634
    affiliation: 5
affiliations:
  - name: Institute of Geophysics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
    index: 1
  - name: Swiss Seismological Service, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
    index: 2
  - name: GeoAzur, Université Côte d’Azur, France
    index: 3
  - name: Lufthansa Industry Solutions, Raunheim, Germany
    index: 4
  - name: Mondaic AG, Zurich, Switzerland
    index: 5

date: 22 December 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---


# Summary
Detecting earthquakes and compiling them to earthquake catalogs are fundamental tasks in seismology. 
Acoustic emission sensors allow the detection of tiniest so called picoseismic events, representing fractures on the 
cm or dm scale (-5<magnitude<0), even smaller seismic events are recorded in the laboratory. Picoseismic events have 
corner frequencies of 1 kHz-100 kHz. They are typically recorded with sampling frequencies of 200 kHz to 1 MHz and cannot be 
handled by standard seismic processing software that is developed for signals with frequencies f<500 Hz. Commercial software 
for continuous recording and processing of picoseismicity exists (e.g. GMuG-conti, fastloc.REEL) and is successfully used 
in scientific in-situ experiments (e.g. hydraulic stimulation, earthquake nucleation, nuclear waste disposal). However,
commercial software comes with restrictions unfavorable for university-based in-situ experiments in underground 
laboratories, where tailoring the software to experiment specific questions or adding newly developed analysis 
techniques are routine operations in order to advance the study of the rock response in great detail. 
The open-source DUGseis software package fills this gap. It has been developed to manage, process and visualize 
continuous, high-frequency seismic data. The package can be used to create real-time and post-processing earthquake 
catalogs and to directly visualize their event waveforms and locations in a graphical interface. As the software is 
Python-based, users can easily add their own processing routines.

# Statement of need
The open-source, Python-based DUGseis package is designed to align with the functionalities of 
SeisComP [@seiscomp], a standard software used in microseismic large-scale earthquake processing (<500Hz, M>-0.5). 
DUGseis is tailored for picoseismic events (-5<M<0) with much higher frequency ranges between 1 kHz - 100 kHz [@Plenkers2022], as recorded by 
acoustic emission sensors (AE sensors). High-frequency seismic data processing is common in mining environments to 
monitor tunnel stability and has become very popular in underground laboratories [@Plenkers2022]. To date, many projects 
used commercial software (e.g. GMuG-conti from GMuG Gesellschaft für Materialprüfung und Geophysik, Bad Nauheim/Germany,
www.gmug.eu or fastloc.REEL from Grzegorz Kwiatek, www.induced.pl/software/fastloc-reel) 
lacking the flexibility to adapt to the specific needs of the project since they are not open-source. Additionally, many projects 
used trigger-based recordings, which means that the incoming waveform data is only saved to disk when a pre-set 
trigger threshold is reached by a recorded event. A disadvantage of the triggered recording strategy is the 
so-called dead time. Once an event has been triggered, no further event can be triggered until the processing of 
the first triggered event has been completed. The dead time can be a multiple of the recording time, meaning that 
important events can be missed if another event has just occurred before. Eliminating this dead time is important 
when high event rates are expected. With DUGseis it is possible to record and store [@DugSeisAcqui] continuous 
waveform data in the MHz range and process the data directly, removing these dead times. As DUGseis is open-source and Python-based,
researchers have the flexibility to complement the processing with their own Python-based 
codes, adapted to the need of their project. Compared to commercial software this flexibility of DUGseis is a major advantage.

# Functionality and Features
The DUGseis software is a Python-based package that focuses on processing continuous high-frequency data, 
extracting waveforms of picoseismic events and creating an earthquake catalog. To make its use and output more 
accessible to seismologists, some features use modules and functions from the ObsPy package [@Beyreuther2010], 
a popular package in seismology.\
The DUGseis software requires sensor metadata with sensor locations as StationXML files and continuous waveform 
data in the ASDF format [@Greenfield2015; @asdf] to run. Here, the continuous waveform data was acquired using  
DUGseis acquisition [@DugSeisAcqui], another software package developed specifically for the Bedretto Underground 
Laboratory to record and store waveform data from AE sensors in the ASDF format using specific Spectrum digitizer 
cards. For general use of the DUGseis package presented here, the waveform data does not need to be acquired 
from the DUGseis acquisition, but the ASDF format can be transferred from other data formats. \
DUGseis retrieves all important information regarding data directories and processing settings from a 
configuration file. The configuration file can be used to open a graphical interface or passed to 
the processing script. After processing the continuous waveform data, DUGseis outputs an event catalog as 
a database, which can also be saved as QuakeML or CSV files. \autoref{fig:DUGseisScatch} shows 
the input and output of the DUGseis processing.

![In- and output of DUGseis processing. \label{fig:DUGseisScatch}](DUGseis_InputOutputScatch.png)

***Data processing***\
The processing itself is done within Python scripts that call various DUGseis functions, increasing flexibility 
of use.\
DUGseis was mainly developed to process continuous waveform data recorded by AE sensors. @Villiger2020 used 
an initial version of the DUGseis software at the Grimsel Laboratory. The software was further developed for 
the hydraulic stimulation experiments performed at the Bedretto Underground Laboratory [@Obermann2024]. For 
this purpose, it was necessary to process data in real-time during the stimulations in order to assess the hazard 
potential of the ongoing stimulation and to gain a direct understanding of the fluid propagation in the rock 
volume. In addition, more detailed post-processing was required after stimulation to learn 
more about the rock volume response. Both, real-time analysis and post-processing can be carried out using the 
DUGseis package. During the live processing, directories are monitored in real time for new incoming data. 
For the post-processing, all directories containing stored continuous waveform data are passed to the processing 
script. This continuous data is then re-processed during replay, which is a major advantage over 
trigger-based software, where only the waveforms of the already triggered events could be revisited. \
The DUGseis package includes many typical seismological processing steps to produce earthquake catalogs. The 
steps may include a detection stage to select event candidates on a number of predefined sensors. This step 
can be useful to speed up the processing, especially in real-time. Other processing steps are the picking 
of all traces with different pickers (e.g. STA/LTA), the localization of events with a basic location algorithm and 
the estimation of magnitudes, currently based on acoustic emission sensors. Several methods are implemented for 
some of the processing steps, whcih can be selected by the user. Furthermore, all processing steps can be adapted 
to the needs of the researcher. For more detailed information on which steps were used in the Bedretto Underground 
laboratory, see @Obermann2024.\
After processing, the output of the events, including arrivals and picks, are stored in a 
database and can also be saved as QuakeML or CSV files.

***Graphical Interface***\
Another feature of DUGSeis is its ability to visualize the recorded waveform data and to allow manual repicking and 
relocating, both in real-time and in post-processing. The graphical interface (GUI) displays not only waveforms, but also 
the output of the processing stage, such as the origin and pick times of an event. Additionally, 
the event and sensor locations are shown in a 3D visualization. \autoref{fig:GUI_example} shows the 
layout of the graphical user interface.\
The GUI provides the ability to inspect each event and view the channels that recorded 
the event. In addition, manual repicking and relocating can be done here. 

![Graphical interface of GUI with waveforms and picks of an event and the 3D plot of the events in the database. Data from @DUGseisExample. \label{fig:GUI_example}](DUGseisGUI_V3.JPG)

# Usage
Since 2021 dozens of hydraulic stimulation experiments have been performed at the Bedretto Underground 
Laboratory in Switzerland [@Ma2022; @Plenkers2023; @Obermann2024]. In this context, the DUGseis package 
was used to detect picoseismicity by processing the incoming high-frequency waveform data in real-time and 
in post-processing mode [@Obermann2024]. A small seismic dataset from one of the hydraulic stimulations can be 
found in [@DUGseisExample].

# Acknowledgements
The submitting author, Martina Rosskopf, is funded by SNF Project “Characterizing and understanding Enhanced 
Geothermal Systems (EGS) - novel tools and applications in a deep underground laboratory” (200021_192151). The 
BedrettoLab is financed by ETH Zürich and the Werner Siemens Foundation. This paper is BULGG publication BPN_023.

# References
